---
title: 'MZsearch: A Python-Based Compound Identification Tool for GC-MS and LC-MS-Based Metabolomics'
tags:
  - Python
  - metabolomics
  - compound identification
  - similarity measure
  - spectral library matching
  - compound identification
  - Cosine correlation
  - Shannon entropy
  - Renyi entropy
  -  entropy
authors:
  - name: Hunter Dlugas
    orcid: 0000-0002-6819-0045
    equal-contrib: true
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: Xiang Zhang
    orcid: 0000-0003-1102-6313
    affiliation: "3"
  - name: Seongho Kim
    equal-contrib: true 
    affiliation: "1, 2"
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Oncology, School of Medicine, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA
   index: 1
 - name: Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Core, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA
   index: 2
 - name: Department of Chemistry, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA
   index: 3
date: 25 June 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# Summary

A primary goal in metabolomics, the qualitative and quantitative study
of metabolites, is to identify chemical compounds in a given sample.
This often involves identifying and quantifying metabolic biomarkers for
use in diagnosing, treating, and stratifying the risk of various
diseases. A central tool for compound identification in metabolomics is
mass spectrometry, which produces the mass spectrum for a given chemical
compound. Each peak in the mass spectrum represents an ion fragment,
with one axis representing mass to charge ratio (m/z) and the other axis
representing relative intensity. A popular method used to identify an
unknown chemical compound based on its mass spectrum is spectral library
matching. This process involves computing a measure of similarity
between the mass spectrum of the unknown chemical compound and each mass
spectrum in a reference library. The unknown chemical compound is then
identified as the one from the reference library whose mass spectrum is
most similar to that of the unknown compound. We present MZsearch, a
command-line tool written in Python that implements spectral library
matching. The MZsearch tool offers a range of spectrum preprocessing
transformations and similarity measures, and it is capable of analyzing
data generated from gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

# Statement of need

There exist several open-source software tools for working with mass
spectrometry data. The Python package matchms allows one to perform
spectral library matching for both GC-MS and LC-MS and provides an
application programming interface (API) for users to define their own
spectrum preprocessing transformations and similarity measures
[@Huber2020]. The pyOpenMS tool, which is a Python wrapper of the OpenMS
tool, is for analyzing LC-MS data and provides common spectrum
preprocessing transformations such as filtering based on m/z and
intensity values [@Rost2014; @Rost2016]. The Python package
spectrum_utils provides functionality for preprocessing and visualizing
mass spectrometry data [@Bittremieux2020]. The R package metID is a tool
for LC-MS-based compound identification with a focus on allowing users
to combine their in-house database(s) with public databases [@Shen2022].
The R Shiny package ShinyMetID provides users six similarity measures
(Cosine, Weighted Cosine, Stein & Scott, Discrete Fourier
Transformation, Discrete Wavelet Transformation, and Semi-Partial
Correlation) and a graphical user interface (GUI) to perform spectral
library matching to identify chemical compounds from GC-MS data
[@Jeong2023].

In a GC-MS experiment, the resulting mass spectra typically have m/z
values as integers. In contrast, LC-MS experiments produce mass spectra
with high resolution m/z values, often with many decimal places. This
necessitates several spectrum preprocessing steps unique to LC-MS data
analysis, namely centroiding (i.e., merging peaks that are 'close' with
respect to their m/z values) and matching (i.e., aligning the m/z values
so that the query spectrum and reference spectrum have the same length).
In addition to these canonical spectrum preprocessing transformations
for LC-MS data, weight factor transformations and low-entropy
transformations have been proposed to improve the performance of
compound identification for both GC-MS and LC-MS data [@Kim2012;
@Li2021; @Dlugas2024_preprint]. The Shannon Entropy Similarity Measure
has been shown to outperform the Cosine Similarity Measure with respect
to LC-MS data [@Li2021]. A generalization of the Shannon Entropy
Similarity Measure, the Tsallis Entropy Similarity Measure, slightly
outperforms the Shannon Entropy Similarity Measure in both GC-MS and
LC-MS data [@Dlugas2024_preprint]. This recent study has further
demonstrated that the order of preprocessing transformations is also
critical to achieving higher accuracy in compound identification.
However, to our knowledge, there is no tool that includes the
recently-developed, high-performance entropy-based similarity measures
or considers the order of the spectrum preprocessing transformations,
which are important for effective metabolomics studies.

To address the lack of spectral library matching software that considers
both the order of spectrum preprocessing steps and novel entropy-based
similarity measures, MZsearch was developed. The developed MZsearch is a
command-line tool for performing spectral library matching on either
GC-MS or LC-MS data. It allows users to construct their own spectrum
preprocessing order using spectrum preprocessing transformations such as
weight factor and low-entropy transformations. Additionally, the
MZsearch tool includes a novel entropy-based similarity measure, the
Rényi Entropy Similarity Measure, enabling users to choose among four
similarity measures: the commonly-used Cosine Similarity Measure
[@Stein1994], the Shannon Entropy Similarity Measure [@Li2021], the
recently-developed  Entropy Similarity Measure
[@Dlugas2024_preprint], and the novel Rényi Entropy Similarity Measure.

# Functionality

## Spectrum Preprocessing Transformations

Functionality implementing the following spectrum preprocessing
transformations is offered in MZsearch:

-   Filtering: Given user-defined parameters (mz_min,mz_max),
    (int_min,int_max) and spectrum $I$ with m/z values
    $(m_{1},m_{2},...,m_{n})$ and intensities $(x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n})$,
    the transformed spectrum $I^{\star}$ consists of the peaks
    $(m_{i},x_{i})$ in $I$ such that mz_min $\leq m_{i}\leq$ mz_max and
    int_min $\leq x_{i}\leq$ int_max.

-   Weight Factor Transformation: Given a pair of user-defined weight
    factor parameters $(\text{a,b})$ and spectrum $I$ with m/z values
    $(m_{1},m_{2},...,m_{n})$ and intensities $(x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n})$,
    the transformed spectrum $I^{\star}$ has the same m/z values as $I$
    and has intensities given by
    $I^{\star}:=(m_{1}^{\text{a}}\cdot x_{1}^{\text{b}},m_{2}^{\text{a}}\cdot x_{2}^{\text{b}},...,m_{n}^{\text{a}}\cdot x_{n}^{\text{b}})$.

-   Low-Entropy Transformation: Given a user-defined low-entropy
    threshold parameter $T$ and spectrum $I$ with intensities
    $(x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n})$, $\sum_{i=1}^nx_i = 1$, and Shannon
    entropy $H_{Shannon}(I)=-\sum_{i=1}^{n}x_{i}\cdot ln(x_{i})$, the
    transformed spectrum intensities
    $I^{\star}=(x_{1}^{\star},x_{2}^{\star},...,x_{n}^{\star})$ are such
    that, for all $i\in\{1,2,...,n\}$, $x_{i}^{\star}=x_{i}$ if
    $H_{Shannon}(I)\geq T$ and
    $x_{i}^{\star}=x_{i}^{\frac{1+H_{Shannon}(I)}{1+T}}$ if
    $H_{Shannon}(I)\textless T$.

-   Centroiding (only applicable to LC-MS data): Given a user-defined
    window-size parameter $w_{centroiding}$ and a spectrum $I$ with m/z
    values $(m_{1},m_{2},...,m_{n})$ and intensities
    $(x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n})$, the transformed spectrum $I^{\star}$
    merges adjacent peaks $(m_{i},x_{i}),(m_{i+1},x_{i+1})$ into the
    peak
    $(\frac{m_{i}\cdot x_{i}+m_{i+1}\cdot x_{i+1}}{x_{i}+x_{i+1}},x_{i}+x_{i+1})$
    if $|m_{i}-m_{i+1}|\textless w_{centroiding}$ for
    $i\in\{1,2,...,n-1\}$. This centroiding procedure generalizes to
    more than two peaks whose m/z values are within distance
    $w_{centroiding}$ of each other.

-   Noise Removal: Given a user-defined noise removal parameter $r$ and
    a spectrum $I$ with intensities $(x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n})$, noise
    removal removes peaks from $I$ with
    $x_{j}\textless r\cdot\text{max}(\{x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n}\})$ for
    $j\in\{1,2,...,n\}$.

-   Matching (only applicable to LC-MS data): Given a user-defined
    window-size parameter $w_{matching}$ and two spectra $I$, $J$ with
    m/z ratios $(a_{1},a_{2},...,a_{n}), (b_{1},b_{2},...,b_{m})$ and
    intensities $(x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n}), (y_{1},y_{2},...,y_{m})$,
    respectively, of which we would like to measure the similarity
    between, the matching procedure outputs two spectra
    $I^{\star},J^{\star}$ containing the same number of peaks with
    $I^{\star}$ and $J^{\star}$ having transformed intensities and
    identical m/z ratios. Specifically, for a given peak $(a_{i},x_{i})$
    of $I$, if there are no peaks $(b_{j},y_{j})$ in $J$ with
    $|a_{i}-b_{j}|\textless w_{matching}$, then the peak $(a_{i},x_{i})$
    remains in $I^{\star}$ and the peak $(a_{i},0)$ is included in
    $J^{\star}$. If there is at least one peak $(b_{j},y_{j})$ with
    $|a_{i}-b_{j}|\textless w_{matching}$, then the peak $(a_{i},x_{i})$
    remains in $I^{\star}$ and the peak
    $(a_{i},\sum_{j\text{ such that }|a_{i}-b_{j}|\textless w_{matching}}b_{j})$
    is included in $J^{\star}$. This procedure is applied when
    transposing the roles of $I$ and $J$ as well.

-   Normalization: Prior to computing entropy - regardless of whether in
    the context of performing the low-entropy transformation or
    computing an entropy-based similarity score - the intensities of
    each spectrum must be normalized to sum to 1 in order to represent a
    probability distribution. To normalize a given spectrum $I$ with
    intensities $(x_{1},x_{2},...,x_{n})$ into spectrum $I^{\star}$ with
    intensities $(x_{1}^{\star},x_{2}^{\star},...,x_{n}^{\star})$ such
    that $\sum_{i=1}^{n}x_{i}^{\star}=1$, two methods are offered:

    \- Standard: $x_{i}^{\star}=\frac{x_{i}}{\sum_{i=1}^{n}x_{i}}$.

    \- Softmax:
    $x_{i}^{\star}=\frac{e^{x_{i}}}{\sum_{i=1}^{n}e^{x_{i}}}$ where
    $e\approx 2.72$ is Euler's constant.

The flowchart in \autoref{fig:flowchart} depicts the overall workflow of
MZsearch.

![Workflow of
MZsearch.\label{fig:flowchart}](flowchart.png){width="100%,"
height="100%"}

## Similarity Measures

Given a pair of processed spectra intensities
$I=(a_{1},a_{2},...,a_{n}), J=(b_{1},b_{2},...,b_{n})\in\mathbb{R}^{n}$
with $0\leq a_{i},b_{i}\leq 1$ for all $i\in\{1,2,...,n\}$ and
$\sum_{i=1}^{n}a_{i}=\sum_{i=1}^{n}b_{i}=1$, MZsearch provides
functionality for computing the following similarity measures:

-   Cosine Similarity Measure: \begin{equation*}
      S_{Cosine}(I,J)= \frac{I\circ J}{|I|_{2}\cdot |J|_{2}}
    \end{equation*} where multiplication in the numerator refers to the
    dot product $I\circ J=a_{1}b_{1}+a_{2}b_{2}+...+a_{n}b_{n}$ of $I$
    and $J$ and multiplication in the denominator refers to
    multiplication of the $L^{2}$-norm of $I$ and $J$,
    $|I|_{2}=\sqrt{a_{1}^{2}+a_{2}^{2}+...+a_{n}^{2}}, |J|_{2}=\sqrt{b_{1}^{2}+b_{2}^{2}+...+b_{n}^{2}}$.

-   Shannon Entropy Similarity Measure: \begin{gather*}
      S_{Shannon}(I,J) = 1-\frac{2\cdot H_{Shannon}\left(\frac{I+J}{2}\right) - H_{Shannon}(I)-H_{Shannon}(J)}{ln(4)},\\
      H_{Shannon}(I)=-\sum_{i=1}^{n}a_{i}\cdot ln(a_{i})
    \end{gather*}

-    Tsallis Entropy Similarity Measure [@Tsallis1988]:
    \begin{gather*}\label{eq:}
      S_{}(I,J,q)=1-\frac{2\times H_{}(I/2+J/2,q)-H_{}(I,q)-H_{}(J,q)}{N_{}(I,J,q)},\\
      N_{}(I,J,q):=\frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n}\left(2\left(\frac{a_{i}}{2}\right)^{q}+2\left(\frac{b_{i}}{2}\right)^{q}-a_{i}^{q}-b_{i}^{q}\right)}{1-q},\\
      H_{}(I,q)=\frac{\left(\sum_{i=1}^{n}a_{i}^{q}\right)-1}{1-q},\\
      q\neq 1, \ q\textgreater 0
    \end{gather*}

-   Rényi Entropy Similarity Measure: \begin{gather*}\label{eq:renyi}
      S_{Renyi}(I,J,q)=1-\frac{2\times H_{Renyi}(I/2+J/2,q)-H_{Renyi}(I,q)-H_{Renyi}(J,q)}{N_{Renyi}(I,J,q)},\\
      N_{Renyi}(I,J,q):=\left(\frac{1}{1-q}\right)\left(2\times ln\left(\sum_{i}(a_{i}/2)^{q}+\sum_{j}(b_{j}/2)^{q}\right)-ln(\sum_{i}a_{i}^{q})-ln(\sum_{i}b_{i}^{q})\right),\\
      H_{Renyi}(I,q)=\frac{1}{1-q}ln(\sum_{i=1}^{n}a_{i}^{q}),\\
      q\neq 1, \ q\textgreater 0
    \end{gather*}

# Usage

MZsearch has three main capabilities: (i) converting the raw data to the
necessary format for spectral library matching, (ii) running spectral
library matching to identify compounds based on their mass spectrometry
data, and (iii) plotting a query spectrum vs. a reference spectrum
before and after preprocessing transformations.

These tasks are implemented separately for (i) GC-MS and (ii) LC-MS data
due to the different spectrum preprocessing transformations. To see all
parameters for any of the five main scripts (build_library.py,
spec_lib_matching_lcms.py, spec_lib_matching_gcms.py,
plot_spectra_lcms.py, plot_spectra_gcms.py), see the documentation at 
<a href="[url](https://github.com/hdlugas/MZsearch)">[link text](https://github.com/hdlugas/MZsearch)</a>.


# Acknowledgements

This research was partially funded by NIH grants (National Institutes of
Health R21GM140352), (National Cancer Institute P30CA022453), (National
Institutes of Health P20GM113226) and (National Institutes of Health
P50AA024337). Computations were performed on Wayne State University's
High-Performance Computing Grid.

# References
